should accept yourself just the way you
are what does that say about who I
should become is that just now off the
table because I'm already good enough in
every way so am I done or something get
the hell up get your act together adopt
some responsibility put your life
together develop a vision unfold all
those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world
and that'll be the adventure of your
life
[Music]
and a scientist's comparative advantage
is not social work it is not social
justice even if we're going to bracket
that term social justice which I am
forced to do because I think it's a
Preposterous phony term but let's say
there is such a thing that is legitimate
it is ridiculous for our academic our
universities now to be telling
scientists that we are going to evaluate
you based on whether you are doing
enough equity work the only obligation
of a scientist is to use his
intellectual capacity to push back the
boundaries of ignorance and to continue
this stunning
Evolution out of poverty penury disease
want vulnerability that has given us
lives that would have been
unimaginable 200 years ago we live like
no God on Olympus ever had a hope of
living
[Music]
hello everyone Heather Lynn McDonald is
an American political commentator
essayist attorney and author her new
book
mid-april release when race Trump's
Merit is now available
Heather it's a pleasure to be able to
talk to you today I thought I might open
our conversation about your new book
when race Trump's Merit with a technical
description of what constitutes Merit
and so and you may know some of this but
I I doubt very much whether the people
who are watching it watching and
listening know
um
so imagine that you're tasked as a
psychologist with
ethically proceeding to develop hiring
criteria for a given job
so what you have to do is you have to
perform what's called a job analysis and
what that means is a decomposition of
the requirements of the job into a list
of skills and functions
and then
you
you have to look for predictors then on
the hiring side that will increase the
probability that the person you hire
will be able to carry out that list of
skills and functions
now it turns out that as Jobs increase
in complexity
and so a complex job is one where the
demands of the job change quite rapidly
so there are jobs like Factory line
worker is a good example where once
you've learned the routine all you do is
repeat it and then there are other jobs
where the requirements of the job switch
from situation to situation and day to
day and so managerial jobs are complex
sales jobs are complex jobs in the
medical field are complex scientific
jobs are complex
and then it turns out that if the
ability to deal with complexity is one
of the Hallmarks of Merit then the best
predictor of that ability is a test of
General cognitive ability and
essentially on age
corrected test of General cognitive
ability is an IQ test and the reason
that IQ tests are good predictors of
performance in complex jobs is because
IQ tests assess the ability to learn
and they're actually very very good at
that and the problem with throwing out
the cognitive test literature let's say
because it does produce disparate racial
impact is that
there aren't any more well-validated
measures of anything at all in the
social sciences or in medicine than
tests of General cognitive ability and
the people who derive the statistics
that made tests of General cognitive
ability possible
are the same people who derive the
statistics upon which all social and
medical science is predicated and also
by the way a fair bit of physical
science as well because physicists use
equations that are derived from the
statistical literature statistics means
State and you know you hear that social
scientists have physics Envy but much of
the
approach conceptually that physics
physicists have used particularly in the
last century were actually derived from
the social sciences rather than the
reverse so Merit
there's actually a technical definition
of Merit and Merit is the rankering
ordering of people in relationship to
their ability to perform the tasks of a
given job
there's a commonality of Merit across
complex jobs and the general tests of
General cognitive ability are a measure
of that central tendency to adapt to
complex situations and so insofar as
there are jobs and in so far as people
differ in their ability to perform those
jobs there is Merit and Merit in that
sense can be assessed there's Merit in
relationship to those jobs Merit can be
assessed most accurately by tests of
General cognitive ability and then that
instantly gets us into the equity
nightmare so anyways that's the
technical definition of Merit for those
of you who are watching and listening in
case you're interested
um now Heather has just written a book
called when race Trump's Merit and I
thought it could have been titled
somewhat more broadly when group
identity trumps Merit because it's not a
problem that's only focused on Race
although that's definitely a punchier
title so what why is it that you decided
to focus on this particular topic and
what do you think your book brings to
the table we'll walk through your book
step by step but we might as well open
with that uh Jordan thank you so much
this was a writ book written out of a
combination of sorrow and rage sorrow at
the fact that the institutions that I
love classical music art philosophy
literature were being torn down by a
false narrative saying that if a
tradition has a demographic history that
is predominantly white that is the
European tradition it is per se a racist
tradition so classical music because the
Great Western composers uh Bach Brahms
Chopin Beethoven smetana we're all white
therefore we should look upon that
tradition with contempt and suspicion
and rage because the arguments that are
being made are so completely
false uh and yet every single
leader of a tradition that brings us
Beauty Sublimity wit has turned on its
own his own
uh tradition and joined in the
anti-racism Crusade
so this book provides the data that
explains why there is disparate impact
when you apply those colorblind neutral
standards of Merit there's a vast
academic skills Gap
that means that any neutral completely
non-discriminatory standard of
academic skills or the cognitive
abilities that you described will have a
disparate impact and that is not because
of racism so Heather you've yeah so
you've noted that the
technical definition of Merit and the
objective definition of Merit which
we've just run through has been
subverted or replaced by this insistence
that if you take any given domain of
inquiry or Endeavor and you note that
there are any differences in
representation
um of population by group category that
that's a prior evidence for something
approximating systemic prejudice
and your concern which is partly what
you're laying out in this book is that
that
axiomatic a priori presumption of
prejudice based on the mere observation
of differential group representation is
not only faulty but faulty enough to
threaten the entire
Enterprise of Merit itself you know
Adrian Wooldridge wrote a very good book
on the history of meritocracy pointing
out that the historical alternatives to
something like objective assessment of
Merit haven't been Equity or equality of
opportunity but nepotism and Dynasty and
so if we were realistic about this even
on the side of the left we would note
that well if we scrapped objective tests
of Merit there's no reason to presume
that what we would get out of that
wouldn't be something far worse that
being nepotism and Dynasty now what what
has been your response to the
replacement of the idea of Merit with
the idea of equity or equality of
outcome and how do you define equity
well first of all you know it's it's a
puzzle what really does the left believe
there's two options one option is they
think that these objective tests are in
fact covertly racist that despite the
history that you described of the
development of these occupational
analyzes that had nothing to do with
race you know this was not the issue it
was it was employers seeking help from
psychologists in breaking down the
cognitive needs of different jobs uh if
this could have happened in China or in
India where the race issue was not
present so there was no reason to think
that those tests were devised with some
ulterior motive of keeping out blacks
but no quite the argument well quite the
contrary because even by the critical
standards of the left if capitalism is
motivated by the greed that the left
purports motivates it there was every
reason nonetheless there was every
reason for the people who were
developing these tests to concentrate
not on nothing but race and sex blind
Merit if for no other reason than to
maximize their own profit and so because
it meant that if you got a if you
developed a test that could find Talent
then it had been hidden by racial or sex
Prejudice you could Arbitrage that and
make a fortune which is what you do if
you can hire extremely qualified people
at a lower than market rate because
they've been prejudiced against so in
fact all the the the tension that might
have pushed the tests in a biased
Direction was actually extant even by
the leftist's own hypothesis in exactly
the opposite direction and that is in
fact how it turned out in reality
because the use of cognitive tests did
allow us as a society to discover talent
that had been hidden from view
beforehand and that was well established
by the Socialists for example in the UK
in the 1930s and then also in the U.S
military you know that was certainly the
case with the development of the s.a.t
of trying to break up the hegemony of
the of the New England wasp Elites in
the transit between Andover and and Yale
um but but just again what explains this
what is their hypothesis and as I say
they would either be arguing that there
was
covert racism in the development of
these tests leaving aside the economic
capitalist interest in finding talented
workers or it's even more nihilistic
than that and they actually do not
believe in
ideas of of Merit or of accomplishment
or excellence and that any test that
purports to
find cognitive ability is per se
invalid and in that case then we should
all be going to a lottery you know if
they really if they really believe that
these tests were illegitimate uh and and
you have college presidents themselves
preposterously blaming their own
institutions for racism you know
whenever whenever a Yale University
president Peter salavi or Princeton's
Christopher ice Gruber gets up there and
beats his chest and say woe is me Yale
at Princeton are so systemically racist
which is merely a case of of uh virtue
signaling to get attention from The New
York Times he's implicitly accusing his
own faculty of racism uh and so if if he
really believed that then they should go
to
randomized admissions if it's not
possible to distinguish between somebody
who is more cognitively suited for a
high-stakes High demands
in academic environment or a workplace
environment
and there's really any kind of test like
that is per se invalid let's just let's
just admit by Lottery and they will
never do that because in fact they do
know that these tests are valid they
predict uh there's nothing that predicts
first grades uh first year grades in
college better than the SAT those grades
in themselves predict by and large how
students behave so it is a utterly
hypocritical narrative that wants to
demean these tests as because they have
racially disparate impacts at the same
time that these schools are ruthlessly
trying within within groups uh to rank
by cognitive ability
right well you'd also have to scrap the
within School grading structure as well
and assign grades on a random basis
because if you open up the admission
process randomly and I think you could
make a case for that I'm not saying you
should but you could make a case for
that for early stage University
education because you could say well
let's ever let's let everybody in and
those who can float will float and those
who can sink will sink and now that has
the advantage of a kind of radical
equality of opportunity it has the
disadvantage of extreme inefficiency in
that many many people will fail and that
will be very expensive for them and for
the institution
if you have grading criteria with regard
to success within the class you're going
to get a rank ordering of achievement
inevitably if there are any criteria
that are being applied at all and the
probability that those criteria will if
they're valid indicators of competence
the prime probability that they'll be
correlated with General cognitive
ability is about 0.6 it's very very high
and then you could even go a step
further and you could say well let's
just scrap the idea of Merit altogether
and what that would mean is that you
would no longer have choice in your
selection of service person
right you'd have to accept whatever
lawyer came your way you'd have to
accept whatever lawyer came your way
whatever physician
it would be a lottery of of of of
matching between professional and
customer as well and you'd also have to
scrap disparate pay
because so in order to remove this
so-called systemic bias you can't only
do that on the selection side well
because actually because the selection
side never quits you're selected on some
basis
um with regards to your ability to go to
university then when you're in
University you're selected on your basis
to do the work and then when you
graduate from University you're selected
on your ability to do the job and that
might be merely to satisfy your
customers but if if among salesmen for
example if you look at what predicts how
satisfied customers of salesmen are with
the salesman especially if they're
selling something complex one of the
things you immediately find is that a
very good predictor of sales success
happens to be General cognitive ability
and so the fundamental problem is that
General cognitive ability is so
pervasive as a merit index that there's
no getting rid of it without eradicating
the idea of choice and difference at
every single level of every interaction
in human society and if you don't think
that would be a nightmare then you've
never had a bad plumber
I'm going to play Devil's Advocate and
you're absolutely right and and it would
be a very
useful test to ask the levelers on the
left that are trying to tear down every
Sublime institution of Western
civilization in the name of fighting
disparate impact are they willing to go
that far and Have randomized Not Just
College admissions not just law school
and medical school admissions but
randomized choice of professionals and
Consultants
let me just say though in one sense if
you are a radical egalitarianism that
would be in one sense an ideal situation
because what we have now is
we you and I Jordan are people of
education and relative prosperity and we
can choose our doctors and our engineers
and our architects
and our lawyers uh from pretty much the
top of the pool but if we went but the
pool is the same so somewhere in that
pool of doctors are people who really
were at the bottom of their medical
school class squeaked out
with without the assistance of racial
preferences uh same with plumbers same
with lawyers well somebody's hiring them
and and so there is presumably a
a scale of medical competence and the
wealthy
presumably get the best doctors now
that's that's Complicated by the fact
that if you are in an inner city a large
inner city you're probably using that
City's uh teaching Hospital which may be
Colombia or Harvard in which case when
you go to the emergency room you are
getting the Top Doctors uh not the worst
but if you're relying on a clinic in on
126th Street East 126th Street in East
Harlem
uh you may not be getting the doctors
that we assume as our Birthright we
should be able to to contract with so
it's an interesting question I mean the
the demands of equity
might in fact say why should poor people
get less good medical care and be able
to hire less good profession medical
professionals but this is getting this
is getting a little far afield and and
uh into sort of um you know rawlsy and
definitions of of what you would choose
it in your uh prior you know part of the
problem and this is an intractable
problem is that and it is really a
painful thing to encounter I mean one of
the things that the authors of the bell
curve pointed out Richard hernstein one
of the authors was that in the typical
ivy league environment
the typical ivy league inhabitant never
meets anybody in the lower half of the
cognitive ability distribution and so if
you happen to teach at Harvard
you're less able students are people who
have an IQ of 115 and that puts them at
the 85th percentile in the general
population you never have a student who
has an IQ of 100 and you certainly never
have a student who has an IQ of 85 which
is 10 percent of the population and one
of the things hernstein pointed out is
that what that means is that the typical
Elite the atypical inhabitants of an
elite institution has no idea what the
full range of human cognitive ability
actually constitutes now I was a
clinician for a very long time and I had
many clients who were inhabitants of the
lower end of the cognitive distribution
so I had one client for example with
whom I spent 29 hours teaching I spent
29 hours teaching him how to fold a
piece of paper with sufficient accuracy
to put it into an envelope with
sufficient Precision so that it could be
put through a automatic
letter sorting machine
now if you bend and mutilate the
envelope to any degree it'll it'll Jam
the machine and so you have to be very
precise and this problem was complicated
by the fact that there were photos
um stapled to this letter and in a
somewhat random manner so that with each
folding exercise you had to take into
account the position of the photo which
also couldn't be folded over and it was
virtually impossible for this man to
learn how to do that and you actually
have no idea how complex a task that is
until you watch someone who just can't
do it and it's part of the reason that
the equity problem and the systemic
racism problem is so deep and pervasive
is that it's actually extraordinarily
painful to apprehend the full range of
human and cognitive ability because
there are people for whom the easiest
task mathematically is no more difficult
than falling off a bed and so that might
be someone with an IQ of 160 who
specialized in physics and there are
others For Whom the probability that
they will ever learn to make change uh
facilely is zero and that's a difference
in quantifiable ability so great that it
becomes qualitative and it is one of the
most painful facts of human existence
that that unbelievably wide range of
generic ability makes itself manifest
and it does so in a rather arbitrary
fashion as well it's that you know it
isn't obvious that the typical extremely
bright four-year-old has done anything
in particular to deserve being that
bright it just happens to be the case
that that's the manner in which they're
gifted and that brings with it a
tremendous Advantage it's far better by
the way economically to be born at the
95th percentile for General cognitive
ability in in terms of your likely
economic outcome at the age of 40. it's
better to be born into 95 percentile
Mark for cognitive ability than the 95
percentile Mark for familial wealth
so there isn't a form of wealth that's
more
profound than that natural General
cognitive ability and there's an immense
diversity in capacity that's built in
there at the beginning and it's no
wonder people recoil against that it's
if you run into that as a clinician or a
researcher it's
it's brute force of nature phenomenon
like the claws and the teeth of a
predator it's it's it's a it's a
terrifying reality and it's very
difficult to mediate against I mean you
know you know the American Military for
example determined after about a hundred
years of General cognitive ability
testing that
um people with an IQ of less than 83
and so that's about 12 percent of the
population
cannot under any circumstances or with
any training protocol conceivable be
trained to do anything of any utility
whatsoever at any level of military
organization and so it's illegal in the
United States to induct someone with an
IQ less than 83 and if you know that
that's 12 percent of the population
that's an absolutely terrifying
statistic because it means that the very
Enterprise that is most hell-bent on
um finding Personnel that would be the
military concluded that despite their
own necessity for finding Personnel they
have to put 12 percent of the population
per per person permanently Out Of Reach
it's unbelievably sad
well you speak about the uh complete uh
bubble that surrounds people teaching in
ivy league universities and their
cluelessness about the range of
cognitive ability and how people live
outside of Cambridge or New Haven uh and
it reminds me when you read the founders
rhetoric uh and 18th century political
theorists and it's not a egalitarian
Viewpoint at all contrary to our current
narrative about that and a certainty
that of course the people should not be
given too much power uh they don't
necessarily shouldn't have the vote uh
and the concern about the mob I think
back in the 18th century there was much
more exposure you don't have
institutions that were completely sealed
off to the less cognitive Elite and so
there was maybe a little more
um realism about what the vast range of
human experience was but I would say
Jordan I know that your instinct is
always to de-emphasize a race aspect
I can just tell you from the United
States perspective that I think a lot of
practically all of this discourse is
driven by race I do not think if there
were
reliable and and seemingly uh continuous
significant Gap standard deviation gaps
in the average IQ between blacks and
whites that there would be a lot of
upset about cognitive testing I feel the
same about our prison population we have
this narrative in the United States
about mass incarceration uh as something
that is per se bad nobody looks at the
actual numbers of who's in prison
compared to the number of violent crimes
being committed it turns out you have if
you commit a crime in the United States
there is a three percent chance that you
will end up in prison so most crime is
going unpunished you have to CR you know
prison is still the Lifetime Achievement
Award for persistence in criminal
offending you have to try very hard to
get a district attorney to say okay I'm
actually going to take your case uh to
court I'm not just going to plea plea
bargain you down uh but you believe
belong in prison you have to have a very
long record before he actually says okay
I'm going to pay attention now so but if
our prison population
was not racially disparate it is now
about a third black whereas blacks are
about 13 of the population
if there was not that disparity nobody
would give a damn about mass
incarceration and it's the same thing
with the fact that there is a
distribution of academic skills the uh
way out in the high end and we also have
the gender issue the sex issue with
males being overwhelmingly represented
at both the high and the low end of math
skills compared to females but but just
to repeat
I think in the United States
we would not be as troubled as we are by
what you say are are tragic uh cognitive
disparities but for the race issue
have you ever read the fine print that
appears when you start browsing in
incognito mode it says that your
activity might still be visible to your
employer your school or your internet
service provider to actually stop people
from monitoring your online activity you
need expressvpn think about all the
times you've used Wi-Fi at a coffee shop
hotel or even a friend's house without
expressvpn every site you visit can be
logged by the Admin of that Network
that's still true even when you're in
incognito mode expressvpn is an app that
encrypts all of your network data and
reroutes it through a network of secure
servers so that your private online
activity stays private expressvpn works
on all your devices and is super easy to
use the app has one button you tap it to
connect and your browsing activity is
secure stop letting strangers invade
your online privacy by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expresvpn.com Jordan and get three extra
months free expressvp n.com Jordan
[Music]
right right well I looked into the race
issue a lot when I worked at Harvard
because we were I worked with a student
there on developing efficient assessment
tests both on the cognitive and the
temperamental side so for example in a
managerial domain
you want people who are who have traits
that are associated with high intrinsic
conscientiousness and by the way there's
no racial differences in
conscientiousness and conscientious
people are diligent and orderly and
industrious and task oriented and
detail-oriented and fundamentally a
conscientious person is someone who's
capable of formulating and keeping
verbal contracts and it's the next best
predictor of success in managerial
domains next to General cognitive
ability it's not a great predictor of
entrepreneurial ability by the way and
uh we look deeply into the racial
literature at that point and I was
trying to account for the fact of these
persistent racial differences and one of
the things I found for example that was
very strange was that the differences
between the general cognitive
performance of North American Native
Americans and Caucasians was much
smaller than the difference between uh
performance between the black population
and the Caucasian population and that's
a that's a tough nut to crack because if
you had to find a population that was as
historically oppressed in the United
States as the black population the
Native American population would
certainly spring to mind I think you
could make a strong case for equivalence
of outcast status let's say and
certainly a strong case for
multi-generational
pervasiveness and continuing uh
multi-generational pervasiveness but it
doesn't manifest itself in the general
cognitive ability difference front and
so that was disheartening to note that
more recently
we might
point out that
um there are there's plenty of evidence
that environmental intermediation can
produce improvements in general
cognitive ability the Flynn effect is
demonstrated that and it's quite clear
that on average people in the United
States score quite substantively higher
on IQ tests than they did a hundred
years ago and a lot of that is a
consequence of improved nutritional
status for example and the fact that
information is at hand for pretty much
everyone and it's also the case that the
racial gaps in general cognitive ability
performance have been decreasing over
about a 30-year period and that they're
actually much smaller in childhood than
they are in adulthood
and that's the one point of optimism
that someone very hard-headed might
still maintain in relationship to the IQ
literature looking at it on the racial
front is that at the age of five or so
the difference between Caucasians and
blacks for example is something more
approximating five points than the say
10 to 12 points that seems more standard
by adulthood and no one really knows why
that is why that Gap expands across time
and it would be very useful to at least
in principle to focus our sociological
and psychological investigations into
determining why that is I suspect
phenomena like fatherlessness play a
role
I also suspect that early literacy is
relevant you know that in the typical
middle class family a kid of
forget race for a minute if you look at
the typical middle class family compared
to the typical working-class family a
typical middle class kid by the age of
three or four has been exposed to a
veritable plethora of books and and
semantic information compared to a
working class kid all things being equal
and the differences in exposure
magnitude is absolutely remarkable even
by the age of three and so there's still
some places we might look if we were
really interested in remediating the
remaining differences in general
cognitive ability
so
um but well we've tried that I mean this
is the whole Perry preschool experiment
and yeah absolutely this has been noted
the uh difference in the number of words
that children hear from poor and middle
class backgrounds and I I would
absolutely agree with that one question
is uh is the
failure to surround lower class children
with Rich verbal environments is that a
function of just ignorance about good
child rearing or do you get somewhat of
a
circular Loop where it is the lower
cognitive
level of the parents that results in
this type of
inadequate from our perspective maybe
there's other strengths going on there I
don't know I've got a kind of an
appellation white trash uh couple living
underneath me in my California apartment
and I can tell you it's an amazing uh
contrast there really are class
differences that are hilariously
stereotypical but these guys live up to
it to the T I mean every everybody in
their environment has no teeth uh either
because of of meth or they're just beat
each other up too much but there's
clearly I I would not want to be the
child of those parents and they're not
married there's both um I mean so the
best predictor of the IQ of a child is
the average IQ of the parents
and so you definitely get a situation
where
um
cognitive resources accumulate and this
is particularly true in the modern world
because modern High status women are
much more likely to mate they like like
women in general they made a cross and
up dominance hierarchy so that as women
have become more educated the proclivity
for educated women to only marry
educated men and there's an Associated
IQ uh uh assortative mating phenomenon
going on there that's increased
substantially in recent years and so it
is definitely the case that
environments that are set up by people
who have lower cognitive function are
less likely to be literacy producing
environments but there may be also
additional effects where you know
that could be ameliorated to some degree
because if your parents if the parents
of a given child are both lower than
um average in IQ
their child will on average be slightly
smarter than them there's a phenomenon
called regression to the mean and so if
you have
parents who both have IQs of 145 they
don't produce a child with an IQ of 60
160 they produce a child with an IQ of
130. and if you have two parents with
IQs of 85 they produce a child with an
IQ of say 90 or 95 on average it's
something like that and so those
children could benefit from a richer
semantic environment but the problem
with that on the educational front is
that you know maybe part of the reason
the IQ differences are pervasive
racially is because there are real
differences in literacy culture but a
lot of those might be manifesting
themselves as early as two years old you
know because in the literate family kids
that too are already sitting and reading
often they're not they're just looking
through books but they have a hundred
books in the room and they might spend
an hour a day leafing through them it's
proto-literacy behavior and if you want
to instantiate that kind of
proto-literate behavior in children
that early you have to adopt a pretty
radically invasive neo-colonial attitude
towards the lower class family
and that's that is something that in and
of itself is problematic you know you
want what you want every
working-class family to be mother father
and well-meaning social worker I mean
that's a dismal
that's a dismal deal for everyone
concerned but it's very hard but as I
said early
we we had these early preschool
experiments that were extremely
intensive and they did produce a uh
narrowing of the cognitive skills Gap
but those differences uh disappeared
Yeah by 12 or 16 years later as you
suggest I I would say possibly
um it's a misplaced Obsession of the
elites to be so concerned about pulling
everybody up to a higher average level
of cognitive capacity what really is
concern to our society at this point is
the breakdown of Bourgeois values and
you say there's no differences in
conscientiousness among groups I hope
that's the case but that's really I
think you know our race problems would
go away
if we could extirpate the dysfunctional
underclass culture and that is something
that is tearing down uh
Black's potential to succeed by
embracing this I ant oppositional
culture that says that academic effort
and achievement is anti is acting white
it glorifies criminality uh glorifies
conspicuous consumption
misogyny
maximal uh procreation you know having
as many children as you can by different
baby mamas if we could get
uh I would say an intervention that was
maybe focused Less on the cognitive
matters and more on simply deferring
gratification self-control the types of
of issues that that uh Edward Banfield
wrote about in the uh unheavenly City
that that would be the most important
thing to focus on because I'm not sure
that efforts to change the cognitive
skills Gap will be that successful over
time but but really all we ask is people
to respect the law uh and to to restrain
their impulses
and as you pointed out the the data for
let's say uh the Head Start Enterprise
does indicate very clearly that these
wide scale attempts to increase General
cognitive ability did not succeed what
you saw with Head Start was that
the children who went through Head Start
were more likely to be in the proper
grade for their age and they were more
likely to graduate from high school and
they were less likely to become pregnant
in teenage Hood but that hope for
expanding boast of cognitive ability as
a consequence of Early Childhood
Intervention
did it occurred
in the immediate aftermath of the
Head Start experience but was
obliterated as a general rule by grade
six all the other kids caught up and so
then there's only two places to go from
there and one is to go even earlier into
the intervention
which means you start taking kids away
from their family in some real sense at
the age of let's say two or even earlier
and that's a Rat's Nest and a nightmare
of its own accord or to understand that
as you pointed out that there are other
socioeconomic
variables that might be focused on I
think one of the most interesting ones
biologically is likely fatherlessness
like we do know for example that girls
who don't have a father will hit puberty
on average at least a year earlier which
is substantially earlier and that
indicates a real biological impact of
the lack of a masculine figure in the
household because that's a walloping
um
physiological difference we know that
boys who have lack of father at the age
of 12 have telomeres so this is a
genetic difference that are on average
something approximating 15 percent
shorter which means that all other
things being equal they're already
doomed to a much shorter life
and so well and so we don't know what
the pervasive multi-generational
consequences of the breakdown in
familial structure
in the final analysis are I mean it does
appear that the black population has
fallen behind on the family integration
and stability front since the early
1960s rather than making advances and it
doesn't look like that's good for anyone
concerned given the absolute wealth of
data showing how pervasive a problem at
every level fatherlessness happens to be
we also have no idea what the
consequence of fatherlessness is on
the development of General cognitive
ability across time there might be a
literature on that I that I don't have
to be familiar with but it's it is
certainly the case that that's another
place we might look if we were trying to
bolster social stability and eradicate
some of the
pervasive differences in
in uh what would you say General
psychological well-being that seemed to
be associated with race
well yeah I mean you're I think you're
uh
you're playing this as how how bad it is
you know when Daniel Patrick Moynihan
wrote his astoundingly present report in
the 1960s warning that the country was
about to Screech to a dead halt with
regards to further civil rights progress
uh his reason was not a Resurgence of
white racism or changing economic
positions in the country opportunities
in the country his reason was what he
saw at the time as a catastrophic
breakdown in the black family at that
point when when Moynihan wrote this
report the out of wedlock birth rate for
blacks was 23 percent and Moynihan said
that with that number of young black
males growing up in single-family homes
without fathers to socialize them to
civilize them growing up without the
expectation of a marriage culture this
population is doomed it you will not get
out of underclass poverty culture gang
culture well what what are we at today
we're at 71 percent
uh of of what Moynihan was raising an
alarm about so Three Times Higher about
and so it is absolutely at civilization
destroying levels and what is as bad and
we know you say we don't know the
cognitive uh consequences of that that's
probably true but we certainly have
ample data on the fact that kids growing
up in single parent family homes are
four or five times as likely to be poor
you know you say you'd be better off
being born with a smart parent than a
rich parent I would say you're better
being better off being born with two
parents than one welfare supported
single mother who happens to have a
larger government income than to working
class married parents that are maybe
pulling in twenty five thousand dollars
a year you still if you're in a rawlsian
position of choosing where you want to
end up you choose the two-parent family
over the wealthy single mother so things
are really bad but the problem is
how do you fix it and people like you
and I have been going around talking
about the problem of single parenting
and and I was just going to add the
problem is not just for the individual
uh child and growing up without a father
but when boys are raised in a culture
that does not expect them to get married
before they have children
they are absolved of the types of
expectations that can help them become
functioning males and I know I'm in your
territory here Jordan and talking about
how do you civilize the The Savage male
libido but one way you do so is say if
you want to make yourself a plausible
mate you have to learn to defer
gratification you have to learn to have
future orientation and when you're
growing up in an inner city and it is
absolutely the norm that you can start
having sex with girls at age 12 they may
or may not get pregnant but you will
have no further responsibilities there
is no reason to develop those
those skills of self-control that make
you a plausible worker a plausible
husband a plausible colleague in any
kind of voluntary Association so that's
the problem the solution though is
extremely difficult uh because as I've
been reprimanded in the past by Deborah
Dickerson the relationship between the
sexes in the black community is very
very troubled so Heather um I spent a
lot a lot of time studying motivation
for drug and alcohol abuse and
among savvy researchers into the
addictive realm the question is never
why do people take drugs the question is
always given the overwhelmingly
reinforcing properties of drugs
cocaine and alcohol perhaps above all
why don't people do nothing but take
drugs all the time
and the answer in the typical situation
for young men who are statistically more
likely to abuse alcohol for example is
that most young men abuse alcohol when
they're young say between the ages of 17
and 25 or so and the reason they stop is
because they take on what we would
generally regard as adult
responsibilities they develop a career
they get a permanent girlfriend maybe
they have children and they re realize
that their impulsive hedonic lifestyle
is interfering with that and that it
isn't sustainable and so they grow the
hell up and wise up and start walking on
the straight narrow path if you're never
required in your lifetime to adopt the
responsibilities particularly of
Parenthood there's no reason that that
competitive hedonistic lifestyle won't
just continue now you know it gets
pretty stale and ugly by the time you're
40 uh even if who wants you know you
want to be a juvenile teenager teenage
player by the time you're 40 it's pretty
contemptible but
um
the the problem with depriving people of
responsibility is that you deprive them
of the necessity that matures them and
the problem with that is that that
produces a lifestyle that is
self-destructive in in and actually
relatively short order and so by lifting
the responsibility off the shoulders of
people and replay replacing that with
let's say State support you're actually
demolishing
you're certainly demolishing the women
because they have no men to rely on but
you're demolishing the men too because
they have no necessity to to
require them to mature and that's
actually a catastrophe not a not a
freedom I think yes that there is a
misunderstanding in Western countries
today that Define poverty
exclusively by the income of a household
or government benefits and the
government believes that just as a
government check can substitute for a
father
and that social workers can substitute
for father that that income is all that
we need whereas in fact what really is
the key is whether the household is
passing on
social capital and those traits that
make one able to
sees opportunities that still are
available in Western societies there's a
critique from the right that uh is
trying to adopt some Lefty economic
criticism uh that might say that well uh
because of big business or or
globalization
uh the economic situation for
the working classes is
irredeemably grim and that I'm not going
to dispute that but I still would say uh
that there is there are opportunities
for people who are willing to hustle to
uh discipline themselves to not be
addicted you know the the problem of
drugs in the United States is absolutely
horrific we are a society that seems to
be so spiritually bereft that people
turn to drugs at much higher rates than
elsewhere but if you are straight and
are reliable and show up every day and
do not scream at your at your boss
but have the ability to to with strain
your impulses you will be able to have a
decent life and those are the issues
that are most essential uh not not
whether you've got parents with money or
what your race is it really is the
Bourgeois values and those are are
disparaged in in society today you know
there's the book by by former editor at
City Journal the dream in the nightmare
that pointed out that the
60s counter-cultural revolution of of
you know tuning out getting high and and
uh you know disparaging what your
parents worked hard for that that was
something that the wealthy could dabble
in and then come out ahead but when you
have that corrosive idea that normalcy
is somehow racist or acting white and
that you give license to people that are
going to thumb their noses at the law
that are going to
shoplift Rob Turn Style jump with
impunity
and get more involved in drugs they're
not they don't have the safety nets and
so that was really a catastrophic uh
development in our culture that the
elites survived
listeners of the show are probably
familiar with Dr Peterson's lion diet as
a producer I've been inspired by Dr
Peterson to add more meat to my own diet
that's why I'm so excited for the
arrival of my own moink box let me tell
you why sixty percent of U.S pork
production comes from one company their
Hogs are given something called
ractopamine which is banned in 160
countries yet you find it in your
grocery aisle every day if you like
knowing exactly where your meat comes
from check out moink today with moik
that place is from small Family Farms
all across the country Mike delivers
grass-fed and grass-finished beef and
lamb pastured pork and chicken and
sustainable wild caught Alaskan salmon
right to your door wink offers rib eyes
chicken breasts pork chops salmon
fillets and much more you choose the
meat delivered in every box you can help
save the family farm and get access to
the highest quality meat on earth when
you join the moink movement today so
keep American farming Going Strong by
signing up at moinkbox.com jbp right now
and Dr Peterson's listeners can get a
free package of bacon in your first box
it's the best bacon you'll ever taste
that's
m-o-i-n-kbox.com jbp moinkbox.com jbp
Heather you open your book with a
discussion of the cultural revolution in
it it is in part this revolution of the
1960s that you described and you also
described the values that the uh
radicals in the 1960s the rich radicals
let's say we're rebelling against as
Bourgeois and I would say from a
psychological perspective it's actually
reversed is that what constitute
Bourgeois values are actually functional
values and the reason that they're
functional is because they work if you
iterate them for a long period of time
in a social environment and so
conscientiousness is a good example of
that because in many ways Bourgeois
values are values that promote
conscientiousness
they're pushed very hard in Asian
societies for example and those would be
virtues of discipline and dutifulness
and dedication and industriousness and
um and the ability to maintain to
formulate and maintain contracts and
that is a very good predictor of
long-term success and so those values
aren't precisely Bourgeois they just
happen to be productive and the
Bourgeois tend to be productive and so
they have those values but the idea the
thing is by claiming those virtues as
Bourgeois you fall prey to the Marxist
worldview that claims that those are
merely secondary derivations of
something that's arbitrary and
class-based when in fact they're not
there are preconditions for success and
it also helps us understand
how we might better Define wealth
because on the one hand you could say
well if you just provided people with
enough of a basic income they would be
wealthy but on the other hand you could
respond to that say no if you're not
being raised in a familial environment
that engenders within you the virtues
that will make you successful in a
social context over the long run you're
poor no matter how much money you have
all that money is going to do for you is
pave the highway to hell and of course
that happens to lots of people who are
incoherent on the value front who have a
windfall is that money is the worst
thing that could possibly happen to them
because it just speeds their inevitable
demise I saw that happen in my clinical
practice all the time when I had
incoherent clients who were badly
socialized let's say much to their own
Chagrin who would receive their
unemployment check or their welfare
check and their Psychopathic friends
would instantly descend and they'd be
out of commission entirely for the three
days it took them to spend every cent
They had on alcohol and cocaine and then
they'd be face down in the gutter and
wake back up and well then they were
back in therapy but money wasn't going
to help that in the least we on the
conservative side or even on the classic
liberal side we have to very carefully
beware that we don't fall into the Trap
of assuming that
assuming the reflexive leftist stance
that the reason people are poor is
because they don't have money
because that isn't the problem poverty
is way deeper problem than mere lack of
money not that lack of well I don't
think any conservative would would ever
argue that I think just the opposite I
think I think it's the left that defines
poverty exclusively in terms of of
economic levels and and ignores cultural
factors completely and and if you talk
about culture you're viewed as blaming
the victim uh and and those values are
now uh criticized as white values
conscientiousness you know with caring
about getting things right accuracy
those since the 1990s and the reign of
the of the charlatan corporate diversity
consultant used to go around to a T and
and Levee Strauss and say that if you
focus on promptness and punctuality well
that's just not that's not valuing
differences and you need to be retrained
so that you don't impose your your white
structure on on on your employees so
that's been going on for a long time and
I I don't think it's the it's the right
that is deficient in that but to get
back to your question of of the way that
the term Bourgeois sounds
I would welcome Alternatives I certainly
am not using it in a uh economic context
necessarily of capitalism
uh but it may be that it is a uh
counterproductive word to use because to
the left it does sound like you are
simply wanting to prop up this
illegitimate system of of private
Enterprise and profit but so when I use
Bourgeois simply mean uh habits of
of self-control of conscientiousness of
respect for authority that used to be
middle-class values well you're
basically you're basically just laying
out a case for the pragmatic utility of
trait conscientiousness and it is the
second best predictor of long-term
lifetime economic success and as I said
there is no evidence whatsoever that
there are intrinsic ethnic differences
in conscientiousness and there's
certainly no evidence that uh I'd be
surprised
well I'm surprised as well but that is
the case and the uh the idea that those
virtues are somehow associated with
racial identity is just it's there's not
there's not a shred of evidence for that
and in fact the scholarship that
established the idea that these Virtues
Of promptness for example and of a hard
work-oriented ethic that scholarship
first of all was conducted by people who
had no academic standing whatsoever it
was one weird opinion paper
unfortunately I can't remember the
derivation at the moment that was
published about 30 years ago that
gained cachet because it fit the leftist
narrative but there isn't a single
serious researcher into the
conscientiousness domain that would ever
make a claim like that and it's useful
to know just on a technical level that
conscientiousness is the best second
best predictor of long-term life success
and in instilling conscientious virtues
which is by the way what Asian families
seem to really
um they're really they really excel at
that so for here's an example so
um the children of first generation
Asian immigrants are likely to do far
better academically in the United States
than the children of American
of Americans uh who aren't immigrants
but that that Advantage disappears in
three generations as the children become
more and more American in their
conscientiousness virtues and the the
Asian advantage in
um economic success which is pronounced
not only among the uh well pronounced
throughout the Asian immigrant
population does seem to be a consequence
of the in inculcation of conscientious
disoriented values so that does seem to
be a very positive uh field of open
possibility in relationship to
remediating racial differences in an
outcome now we don't know how to do that
because it's not all that obvious how
you instill conscientious virtues I mean
the Asians do it in the confines of
their own private family and how to
duplicate that say on the educational
front
um isn't obvious so we're stuck on that
front to some degree as well now you
yeah in oh please go ahead
I was just going to say again I
mentioned my former editors uh Myron
magnet he had a relationship with with
George W bush and was pushing his idea
of homes for teen single teen mothers
where you would take a a young
single teen mother and put her in an
environment of others living small group
homes that would just absolutely
surround that child with
I'm not going to use Bourgeois anymore
you've taught how to say
conscientiousness and and people that
will uh absolutely insist on
on uh ability to
be prompt to respond to to request
politely uh doing homework
meeting expectations and that this this
group home project was based on the
understanding of how deep the lack of
those values were in your typical inner
city home where the mother may be strung
out on crack uh is you know you've got
five different children by five
different parents there the the Father
the boyfriends are coming in and out
it's a completely chaotic household but
the problem maybe this would work that
degree of intensity but it was clearly
economically impossible it would have
been so expensive so what do we have as
a second best solution the second best
solution would be a school that would be
unrelenting in its emphasis on
self-discipline it's it's application of
discipline for failure to obey rules and
you had that for a bit with the
development of
what was came to be known as the no
excuses Charter Schools things like Kip
uh the Success Academy in New York well
what happened to the the no excuses
Charter Schools they fell prey to the uh
self-immolation of of decent
excellent institutions post George Floyd
Kip used to have a motto as which was
work hard be nice seems like a perfectly
innocuous motto right no it turns out
it's racist uh saying to Children work
hard be nice is a function of white
supremacy and so the founders of Kip who
had begun with a civil rights motivation
uh they began in in Texas and then these
schools they spread and they were very
almost uh like boot camp the children
have to walk down one side of the
corridor on their way to class uh every
everything that the teacher does is
scripted the students answers are
scripted in order to remove uh variety
or discretion from teachers because they
believed that they had the answer to how
you inculcate self-discipline and future
orientation in children and it was
working
but now he has had some success with
that at the Michaela School in inner
city London which is a lottery
admissions school and her graduates have
a higher chance of being accepted to
Russell group universities which include
Cambridge and Oxford than any even
private school in the UK and she adopts
that extraordinarily disciplined
approach and that you know unfortunate
you know in some sense that's anecdotal
although she has many graduates but it
does look like there's some possibility
on that front now you just alluded to a
theme that you developed quite intensely
in your book which is post George Floyd
guilt on behalf of every institution
that you can possibly name that had a
meritocratic basis you walk through how
these institutions have emulated
themselves on the pyre of equity since
the George Floyd killing you start with
medicine for example and walk through
science classical music
Art Museum art art museums exactly and
so these these institutions of higher
order learning and culture and describe
in painful detail how they have all
allowed themselves in a fit of guilt to
be subverted by this idiot Equity agenda
which is an extraordinarily dangerous
um uh movement do you want to start
maybe discussing your book more
specifically with a description of why
the equity Doctrine which at first
glance sounds a fair bit like a variant
of equality of opportunity and that
Second Glance seems like only basic
fairness it's very difficult to for
people to understand why that Doctrine
is so pernicious and deadly and so can
you can you summarize in relatively
comprehensible form why the equity
Doctrine is
so catastrophic
well here's the what the left is doing
today it looks around and it chooses
institutions almost at random and if it
finds that there is not a proportional
representation of blacks in that
institution whether this is Google's
computer science force or or Harvard's
Medical Faculty Medical School faculty
or a classical music orchestra or the uh
Western Art collections of a museum or
the partners at an elite law firm uh if
there is not 13 percent
blacks in that institution that
institution is per se racist per se
the only allowable explanation for
racial disparities
uh in a medical practice or in a physics
department in an economics Department in
a math department the only allowable
explanation is racism
and with that rule it means that any
kind of standard that has a disparate
impact on blacks such as an expectation
of of mathematical skill or an
expectation of a grasp of fundamental
medical principles if that expectation
has a disparate impact on blacks it must
be discarded
and it is all coming down there is not a
single institution in our world that is
not vulnerable uh and that will not be
torn down as long as racism Remains the
only allowable explanation for racial
disparities here is the alternative
explanation
for why Google in its in its computer
science and engineering
Workforce is not 13 black the academic
skills Gap
it is mathematically impossible to
maintain meritocratic standards and to
engineer diversity as as the diversity
mongers Define it which is basically
racial uh proportionality
if you look at black 12th graders in the
United States and our 12th grade is the
last year of high school before you go
on to college so these are 16 17 year
old students uh possibly on their way to
college
66 percent of black 8th graders do not
possess even partial Mastery of the most
basic 12th grade math skills those
skills are defined as being able to do
arithmetical calculations or being able
to recognize a linear function on a
graph the number of black 12th graders
who are merely competent
in those simple 12th grade math skills
is six percent and the number who are
Advanced is too small in the United
States to even show up statistically uh
the reading picture is not much better
the American College Testing
organization the ACT
uh says that only six percent of black
12th graders are college ready when you
look at their combined math reading and
science scores and again these are very
basic minimal expectations so given that
there is simply not enough competitively
qualified blacks in the hiring pipeline
to say that every physics department in
this country every chemistry Department
every I.T Department every Tech startup
in Silicon Valley is going to be 13
black nevertheless it is a
you've got to guarantee to end up on the
front page if you write the usual
racial inequity story uh that says okay
this law firm's partner class just
didn't have 13 blacks in it uh this is
pernicious because
are meritocratic standards are not
racist they are designed as we began
with our discussion uh Jordan to
overcome traditional prejudices that had
kept out say uh worthy Midwestern high
school students from Elite ivy league
law schools because the admissions
officers were saying well you're not
really of our our you know you don't fit
in to Harvard because you came from a
farming family and and so we developed
the SATs because they were identity
blind they were colorblind they were
class blind anybody that has the
cognitive skills can get ahead and the
rise of objective colorblind testing
gave us the first wave of cognitive
Elite in our marriage accredit
institutions which was Jews and now the
Asians are coming in and they're
whooping everybody's ass us because they
do have those incredible transmission
belts of conscientiousness in their
homes uh but but they're getting in not
based on race or class privilege but
based on objective meritocratic
standards so if we're going to tear down
these standards because they have a
disparate impact on blacks even though
they are not racist standards we are
engaged in a nihilist Enterprise that
will halt progress it will halt
scientific progress this is not confined
to things that people say oh well it
doesn't matter if if you know classical
music
flagellates itself for Phantom racism
this is happening at the heart of our
scientific Enterprise medical schools
are junking objective tests of Merit
because they have a disparate impact on
blacks are federal science agencies like
the National Institutes of Health are
determining research priorities based
not on scientific need but based on
disparate impact so the NIH is Shifting
precious Federal taxpayer research
dollars from Pure science into research
on racism and racial disparities in
health for the simple reason that black
researchers do less pure science and
they do more racism research and so the
NIH has determined that from now on as
an anti-racist institution it should be
funding more black scientists and so it
is decided we're going to do less
basic Research into the neurological
Pathways of Alzheimer's disease or the
way that signal cell signaling happens
in nematodes for oncology research we're
going to do less of that and we're going
to do more looking at environmental and
racist uh determinants of of black
obesity and those may be valid uh object
research objectives but we should
determine what we research based on our
societal needs not based on the idea
that we should have racial
proportionality in our research grants
it's also the case that that
proportionality
is not only impossible to achieve
technically for the reasons that you
laid out but also impossible to achieve
metaphysically and purposefully so
because if you add the intersectional
doctrine to the racial mix and you
presume that the same argument with
regards to disparate impact applies not
only to race but to gender and then to
all the admixture of the various gender
identities and their interactions
you're almost instantly mathematically
in a situation where it's not even
hypothetically possible to ensure that
there's no disparate impact of selection
techniques across all those
multitudinous group categories and
I actually think that's a feature of the
metaphysical game rather than a bug
because it's perfectly to the advantage
of the radical leftists to set up a game
that the that normative Society can't
win no matter how assiduously it plays
it and so so that's that's a huge
problem because the problem of group
disparity is never going to go away
because you can endlessly multiply the
nature of the groups that you're
measuring and then on the uh societal
side I mean one of the real problems
with denying the most qualified Asians
for example access to these privileged
positions is that you're also denying
Society access to their
outstanding levels of diligence and
general cognitive ability I mean part of
the reason that we developed the acts
and so forth lsats and the mcats was so
that society as a whole could identify
pools of extreme cognitive talent and
exploit them to put it bluntly is that
it's better for everyone if we can find
the smart kids and give them as much
opportunity as possible even if that
means rewarding them in a disparate
manner because we so desperately need
what only they can produce and so you
know we've also bought into this idea
that well if you're an Ivy League
scientist you're in a privileged
position and forgot entirely that yeah
but you also work 80 hours a week
non-stop on your obsessional concern in
a manner that no one else is capable of
doing and the consequence for the rest
of us is that well maybe we now have a
cure for what would otherwise be an
intractable disease and so by playing
this idiot group identity game we
deprive our ourselves of the best that
our entire Society has to offer
right I mean it's it's a
it's an absolute value that human
civilization should strive for
excellence this is our greatness this is
our Divinity to Aspire to be
accomplishing things that have never
been accomplished before to create
Beauty
but it is also if you want to be purely
pragmatic about it in a geopolitical
vein it is also essential for a country
to be able to compete and China I'm not
going to be a an apologist for China it
clearly is has its streaks of
unbelievable Insanity as we saw with its
covid policies uh and it it probably has
massive corruption nevertheless when it
comes to educating its massive
population
it is as far as I know ruthlessly
meritocratic and it wants to find its
top math talent and and throw everything
it's got at them it has a single exit
exam from high school students study
possibly pathologically for that you
know it may destroy childhood but they
are certainly focused on on
maximizing their their talents and it
then China takes those students and
pushes them and and they are China is
pulling ahead from the United States in
many many fields that are essential to
I.T competitives and frankly to defense
a whole range of nanotechnologies a
whole range of artificial intelligence
what are we doing here we are
dismantling gifted and talented programs
we are saying you may be talented in
math but that is a fault that is a
problem we are going to tie you down and
not make sure that you accelerate at the
rate that maximizes your potential
because gifted and talented programs are
not racially proportional there's not 13
percent blacks and gifted and talented
programs therefore we're dismantling
them we're dismantling the exam schools
whether it's uh the the Lowell High
School in San Francisco that has
traditionally been extraordinarily
demanding it has taken students and
pushed them into careers where they
Advance knowledge human knowledge and it
has gone to a lottery system well not
surprisingly the first year after the
lottery system the proportion of D's and
F's in the uh ninth grade class jumped
up 300 percent uh the Thomas Jefferson
School in Virginia also it is being
dismantled because it had a colorblind
utterly Fair non-culturally biased
admissions test but it produced uh that
test had a disparate impact on blacks
and so we're getting rid of it we have
these absurd diversity equity and
inclusion statements that scientists
have to sign that are basically doing
several things they're saying I will
never ever ever break the taboo and
discuss the academic skills Gap I will
conform to the Mantra on campus that the
only allowable explanation for disparate
impact is racism and I will try to
pigeonhole my my life's passion of
studying how you know mitosis happens
with an eye towards understanding cancer
development I will I will try to fit fit
that into some kind of racial Equity
narrative but the fact is as you suggest
Jordan
there is comparative advantage and a
scientist's comparative advantage is not
social work it is not social justice
even if we're going to bracket that term
social justice which I am forced to do
because I think it's a Preposterous
phony term but let's say there is such a
thing that is legitimate it is
ridiculous for our academic our
universities now to be telling
scientists that we are going to evaluate
you based on whether you are doing
enough equity work the only obligation
of a scientist is to use his
intellectual capacity to push back the
boundaries of ignorance and to continue
this stunning
Evolution out of poverty penury disease
want vulnerability that has given us
lives that would have been
unimaginable 200 years ago we live like
no God on Olympus ever had a hope of
living merely electricity itself is a
miracle every day that we walk into a
room and flip that light switch on and
we get light
that's all you need like beyond that I'm
like in awe but that is itself
incredible and we take it for granted we
take and you know why we're we're also
demeaning that because the history of
science for the last 200 years it took
off in the west there was some early
competitors with other civilizations but
the Scientific Revolution the Industrial
Revolution the anti-poverty revolution
it has been the great conversation
predominantly among
the anglo-american European sphere
China's getting into that conversation
now but because it is overwhelmingly
white it is now viewed as again simply a
source of white supremacy and you have
heads of medical organizations you have
the heads of scientific journals like
science that are on a practically
monthly basis putting out statements
saying that science is racism the White
House Office of under Joe Biden the
White House Office of technology and
science policy recently a couple months
ago put out a statement saying that
medicine is an inequity producing
Enterprise these are atrocious Lies by
people that do not deserve their power
but they are not innocuous because they
are breeding resentment and they are
pulling back our greatest talent to a
level of mediocrity
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny
I want villains to get punished but do
you want the villains to learn before
they have to pay the ultimate price
that's such a Christian question
now in your book race when race Trump's
Merit you spend a fair bit of time
concentrating on the effect of the
equity Crusade on the artistic world and
so the world of visual art the world of
music
um
why did you choose to exemplify those
domains as uh
in particular and can you run us through
a description of what you found on the
artistic and musical Visual Arts and
musical front
why did I choose those domains because I
love them because they are the source of
human joy and Transcendence uh what else
is there besides the I mean the the
scientific Enterprise the the
engineering Enterprise the tinkerers
those people who have figured out how to
build things to create Composite
Materials all of this is extraordinary
But ultimately
what matters is the unbearable Eros of
brahms's solo piano work the pathos of a
Chopin Nocturne or mazurka the Elation
that one gets from
Ramos opera overtures or or Mozart's uh
the the the thrill of Mozart's
extraordinary energy and passion and
Sublimity the driving force of the
classical style the beauty of Vermeer of
of Dutch Baroque Golden Age still lives
all of these teach us and and literature
that allows us to enter modes of human
consciousness that we never would have
had access to if we remained mired in
our petty narrow narcissistic selves
artists have the capacity to take us
along with them
into their
observation
of The Human Condition
and they'd have done so in the past
with
Exquisite gem-like eloquence a command
of language that none of us possess a
command of Melody of Harmony of being
able to paint Beauty the watercolors of
John Singer's Sergeant his capacity to
paint
Italian light on Italian Stone and
sculpture and and lemon trees in full
bloom
one is in awe these Traditions that have
given us so much Beauty so much ability
to leave behind possibly even our
sorrows
and and lose ourselves instead in a
novel
of somebody else that that is filled
with wit and irony whether it's Mark
Twain or George Eliot we can lose
ourselves for for hours
in in those imaginary worlds they are
now all every single Western tradition
is being torn down on the phony charge
of racism all that the yahoos have to do
all that the rabble has to do is point
out that a tradition that was born in
Europe which was demographically
historically enough ineluctably white is
therefore racist now here's what they do
not do this is a completely one-sided
game you could also go to Africa you
could say that the tradition of Yoruba
drum language is is all black it is not
diverse Africa was demographically black
we do not expect Africa in its
Traditions to have white artists we
don't go to Chinese classical Opera
which for San centuries was created by
Chinese and we don't say
you don't have black people in Chinese
Opera you're racist or you don't have
white people in Chinese Opera we do not
go to the Indian tradition of the
classical epic and we don't say gee why
aren't you writing about black people in
your classical epic you must be racist
the only tradition that gets the
deconstructive
demystifying technique is the white
tradition
and Museum curators are now turning on
their own collections that have been
given to them over the centuries by
donors of immense generosity the
inevitable wall plaque now if you go to
the 17th century
Dutch and Flemish uh wing of a museum
I've I've noticed this in the Rice
Museum in Amsterdam it's true in the
Metropolitan Museum I'm planning next
week to go to the Museum of Fine Arts in
Boston and I was sort of snooping around
the website and seeing what they got so
they've got a new hanging of their 17th
century Dutch art collection uh it's
their permanent collection but they've
re reconceptualized it of course they've
made the same argument which is Pleasant
all these which is if you have a
gorgeous Dutch still life
of cut crystal of of shining silver of
peeled lemons of translucent Grapes of
oysters possibly a pheasant that still
life is all about colonialism you should
see it through the lens of racial
resentment because the Dutch at the time
were engaged in colonial trade and
Imperial conquest and therefore any
household wealth that was generated in
Holland in delft in Den hog it's all on
the backs of colonialized subjects this
is preposterous
a still life is not about colonialism
but these curators are teaching young
people who may be entering their museums
for the first and possibly the last time
to see beauty Through The Eyes of racial
resentment those Museum directors should
all be fired they are betraying their
their duties they're betraying their
privilege which is to curate one of the
greatest
accomplishments and and civilizational
Legacies of all time and they are
tearing it down through the phony lens
of racial disparity
I used to see this in um
English literature departments for
example is that in principle the people
who study English literature are great
admirers of the literary tradition but
of course one of the things that's
painful
if you happen to be an academic who
admires a great author is the
realization of your comparative
inability to produce such a great work
and if you love those works and are
unable to replicate them yourself it's
quite easy to fall prey to a kind of
bitter resentment and then if you Ally
that with a Marxist Doctrine which is
quite convenient on the moral front you
can claim moral superiority to the
progenitors of that tradition on the
basis of their hypothetical
participation in the in the oppression
landscape and so you can falsely Elevate
yourself above even that which you love
right I mean you destroy your own ideal
in doing so and that's a heavy price to
pay but I can hardly walk into art
museums anymore because I see these
great works of art
and then beside them there's a
commentary which basically I don't think
there's any worse writing that's ever
been done by anyone ever anywhere than
art criticism writing it's it's its own
Universe of pathological enviousness
and there's a great work and then beside
it there's a commentary which basically
says
I the person who's writing this
commentary on this great work am
ethically superior to the artist who
made this work on the following grounds
and you can share in this ethical
superiority by making a few casual
references to a colonial Enterprise that
you don't possibly have the depth of
historical understanding to even begin
to comprehend and it's such a it's an
invitation to an attitude that's so
corrosive and pernicious because it's
not only denigrates the piece of art
which is bad enough given that it's the
whole reason for the Enterprise to exist
but it also invites the viewer instead
of being brought to his or her knees in
awe and gratitude at the creative
ability and to see and feel painfully
the gap between themselves and that
Creator but to say oh no fundamentally
as a mere modern person no matter how
ignorant I am I'm far superior to any of
these people on ethical grounds because
I don't participate let's say in the
colonial Enterprise even though of
course you're participating in the
bloody Colonial Enterprise in 50
different ways with everything you ever
purchase and so it's it really is I
think it's the re-occurrence of the
eternal spirit of Cain essentially you
know that fratricidally and then
genocidally envious spirit that pulls
down and destroys and to see that
manifest itself in art museums and in
the domains of Higher Culture is uh well
appalling Beyond Comprehension and and
painful to anyone who does love those
things that's the difference I mean
that's what is that is the appalling
thing about today it is the very heads
of these institutions that are turning
on their own tradition that is something
new this isn't sort of the academic
critics and Departments of art Theory
and whatnot in universities off to the
side
this is this is Max hollane of the
Metropolitan Museum game of art it is uh
Rondo the head James Rondo the head of
the Art Institute of Chicago
they are the ones that are putting out
this rhetoric of hatred and resentment
and it gives students who are already
just woefully ignorant I mean laughably
ignorant a a reason an excuse a
righteous motivation to embrace their
ignorance you know that all they tell
them to do students now right to dismiss
an author and say I don't need to read
uh Mark Twain or Jonathan Swift or
Anthony trollope or William Wordsworth
uh or Keats is to say well it's a white
male therefore I'm not going to read it
I only want to read I only want to read
books that confirm my own identity how
absurd the point of reading is to get
out of your identity but it gives when
we this we saw this uh it had been long
Brewing but the famous chant at Stanford
University in the 1980s against their
very modest Core Curriculum uh survey
course that all students had to take in
western civilization uh the chant of
those students hey hey ho ho Western
sieve has got to go this was sort of a
play on words because Western Civ
referred both to the actual course at
Stanford but it turns out that this was
actually against the entirety of Western
Civilization because that is what's
going on now and so it is an excuse for
ignorance one of the things we might
point out too here for everyone who's
watching and listening is that
you might say well
fair enough but why bother with the
whole cultural mess and who gives a damn
about literature and art and so forth
and why are we making such a big fuss
about it in the first place and
there's actually a psychological answer
to that being Jonathan height has
recently re-analyzed some data on the
relationship between political
affiliation and mental illness showing
that well first of all there's
pronounced gender gap in that a
substantially higher proportion of women
girls and women are suffering from
diagnosable mental disorders than men
and that's an exaggeration of a
proclivity that has been there for a
long time because women have higher
levels of negative emotion but that
that's also massively
um
affected by political affiliation and so
the people who have the highest rates of
diagnosable mental illness currently are
young liberal women and the reason for
that in part is that the identity that
they've been offered which is this
fragmented subjective hedonistic
identity is actually so dysfunctional as
an identity that it produces anxiety and
hopelessness and it does that because it
doesn't unite them with other people
because to be mentally healthy you
actually have to be United with other
people and it also doesn't give them any
goal of value to strive for in the
future much less and I and a unifying
identity and so that produces a kind of
hopelessness and so part of the reason
that it's so cataclysmic
for students to be disenchanted with the
domain of higher aesthetic inquiry is
that if they can't escape the bounds of
their limited subjective hedonistic
identity the necessary consequence of
that will be social disunion isolation
Discord anxiety and hopelessness those
are the Alternatives and the reason you
go to university to study literature
isn't so you can become educated and
join the club it's so that you can have
a better life that your identity fleshes
itself out not least by the necessity of
coming into contact with other modes of
apprehension that are more sophisticated
than your own but that it actually
orients you in the world so that you are
more firmly grounded and more hopeful
metaphysically in a fundamental Manner
and so you know the leftist Trope is
that all of the different knowledge
systems are nothing that means to claims
on Power and so there isn't any
qualitative distinction between that
which is civilized and that which is
impulsive except
as a consequence of the
self-justification of the hypothetically
civilized but it's simply not true is
that there are all sorts of modes of
sophisticated being that are much more
likely to produce psychological
stability and Hope and Faith rather than
catastrophic and cataclysmic nihilism
and the universities as Greg lewkinoff
has pointed out the universities
couldn't be making people anxious and
depressed at a more rapid rate than they
are if they had planned using the help
of expert psychologists to do precisely
that to produce this narcissistic
emphasis on subjective feeling this
constant referral to subjective feeling
States and this corrosive nihilism in
relationship to anything approximating a
unifying identity and I do think this is
one of the places that your book really
shines is that that's exemplified by the
proclivity of modern institutions of
higher Endeavor to emulate themselves on
the pyre of an idiot reflexive guilt
they're not doing anyone any favors
whatsoever by doing that including
themselves and they're certainly dooming
an entire generation especially of women
as it turns out to something like an
abysmal hopelessness
well let's face it the feminization of
the university is a complete disaster it
explains a heck of a lot that we're
seeing now that we regard as
pathological especially the shutdown of
of freedom of discourse of inquiry of
speech uh because females overwhelmingly
Embrace safetiest values over those of
rationality and freedom of intellectual
inquiry so they are the ones whether why
do you think that is
why do you think that well I
well this gets into your trade which is
we're spiking in the beginning about uh
different levels of of neuroticism you
know we just know that there's females
are much higher on the big five trait of
neuroticism uh and and there's also one
could say that well uh they're sort of
more relational they're more worried
about people fitting in or not feeling
excluded and so they are uh believe in
see part of the problem is though is
that I actually think this whole claim
that speech is harmful is completely BS
and no nobody should take it for for
seriously for one instant it's all just
a form of whining and attention getting
on the part of these favored victim
groups to say that they actually feel
endangered uh by certain ideas uh but to
the extent that that's true
one could argue that females maybe have
a more maternal nurturing uh impulse
Instinct and so they they want to
protect people from real or perceived
harm but they're also uh less interested
in ideas and and the
pursuit of of
logic
reasoning to its end point uh let's do
this then let's do this we're we're
running out of time on the YouTube front
and we've walked through the broader
context of your of your new book and
some of the details as well the new book
being when race Trump's Merit
um I want to talk to you for about half
an hour on the daily wire plus side of
the platform maybe we could have a
specialized conversation in the
feminization of modern institutions
because I'd like I would like to talk to
you about that in some details so for
those of you who are listening and
watching on you on the daily wire plus
platform I often walk my uh guests
through a bit of an autobiography
looking at how their career unfolded for
them and how their interests made
themselves manifest in their life how
their parents supported them or didn't
support them more often did support them
in the case of successful people but I
think with Heather will turn to this
issue of the feminization of of the
modern institution and delve into that a
bit more in detail so for those of you
who might be interested in that you
could pick that up on the daily wear
plus platform and we should probably
turn to that for now thank you very much
for talking to me about your book today
and about your broader concerns and uh
the book is coming out when
April 18th but it's available for
pre-order now I don't know when this
podcast goes out but you can be in with
within the next week or two so it should
be well timed with regard to the release
of your book and so thank you everyone
for attending on the YouTube side of the
world and for the daily wire plus people
who've made this conversation possible
for the film crew here in Oxford England
because that's where I happen to be
today and and to you Heather thank you
very much for agreeing to talk to me
today and congratulations on the
impending publication of your book
thank you so much Jordan I appreciate it
it's always a pleasure
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com